Depressive symptoms are highly prevalent in individuals with schizophrenia spectrum disorders (SSDs) and can substantially increase suicide risk, affect prognosis, and reduce overall quality of life. However, available treatment options are currently limited; this is largely due to insufficient investigation, which can be attributed to presumed comorbidities with major depressive disorder, as well as the difficulty in differentiating depressive symptoms from negative symptoms. 

Here, we applied a partial least squares-correlation analysis to identify connectivity-based features associated with depressive symptoms, as well as common and distinct patterns of network connectivity between depressive and negative symptoms. We utilized a large and heterogeneous sample of individuals diagnosed with SSD (n=157), who manifested varying degrees of depressive symptoms.

Our findings uncovered linked features of functional connectivity that were highly correlated with clinical symptoms. Two distinct psychopathological components of depression in SSD were identified: general depressive symptoms and guilt symptoms, each of which was associated with specific alterations in functional connectivity. Moreover, we revealed both unique and overlapping neural circuitry underlying depressive symptoms and negative symptoms. 

These findings provide valuable insight into the neural circuitry of depressive symptoms in SSD, which could serve as a foundation for elucidating their underlying aetiological mechanisms, as well as the development of more targeted and effective treatment approaches.
